Create 'end to end product ownership' principle (#216)
HO-CTO/engineering-guidance-and-standards: docs/principles/end-to-end-product-ownership.md

---
layout: principle
order: 1
title: End to end product ownership
date: git Last Modified
tags:
- Ways of working
---

Engineering teams will follow a product-centric approach. They will form part of an enduring multidisciplinary team, with full-stack and full-lifecycle ownership, from application build through to the ongoing operation and iteration of services in the 'Live' phase.

---

## Rationale

> As digital services become more and more intertwined with our core business we need to be able to quickly adapt our digital products in response to change requests from the business. Following this, the [Home Office DDaT Strategy directs us to be product-centric](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/home-office-digital-data-and-technology-strategy-2024/home-office-digital-data-and-technology-strategy-2024#be-product-centric), basing our decisions on whether they will help users achieve their goal (outcomes). 

Reviewer: One (pedantic) consideration, I'm not sure "more and more" adds much in comparison to "more", as there's no measure of how much a "more" is worth

```suggestion
As digital services become more intertwined with our core business we need to be able to quickly adapt our digital products in response to change requests from the business. Following this, the [Home Office DDaT Strategy directs us to be product-centric](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/home-office-digital-data-and-technology-strategy-2024/home-office-digital-data-and-technology-strategy-2024#be-product-centric), basing our decisions on whether they will help users achieve their goal (outcomes). 
```

Retaining an enduring and effective team that can quickly iterate on the service ensures that the service can continue to meet changing business needs, and creates incentives to write [high quality software that can be easily maintained]({{ '/principles/write-maintainable-reusable-and-evolutionary-code/' | url }}) over a long period of time. This also helps to reduce the need for large-scale rework and expensive replacement programmes.

> Giving teams ownership and autonomy, and aligning them appropriately with value streams, allows them to focus on delivering business outcomes. When they are well supported, for example by platform teams providing self-service solutions to common requirements, this focus is improved further, enabling improved delivery.

Reviewer: I think this sentence needs to point back towards the principle more... what's the rationale for following a product-centric approach? Here's a suggestion but I'm open to thoughts and further edits around it

```suggestion
Giving teams ownership and autonomy, and aligning them appropriately with value streams, allows them to focus on delivering business outcomes. Improved delivery and focus on product-centricity is enabled through stream-aligned teams having the burden on them reduced by other teams, for example by platform teams providing self-service solutions to common requirements.
```
